[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
nina warhurst and charlie state our
headlines today the toughest coveted
restrictions come into force for 20
million more people in england
in the face of a record rise in the
number of cases
big ben will chime tonight but people
across the uk are urged not to celebrate
the new year with anyone outside their
household
it is a pretty grim
and depressing picture at the moment
the situation in the uk is precarious
in many parts already most secondary
pupils in england are told they won't
return to the classrooms before
mid-january we have reaction from
teachers
and parents the post-brexit trade deal
between the uk and eu
is signed into law and will take effect
at 11 o'clock
tonight and it's sir lewis hamilton the
formula one champion
is knighted in the new year's honors
list
plus it's an icy start for many of you
again and there's a little bit of sleet
and snow around but what are the
prospects as we go
into the start of the new year i'll have
all the details here on breakfast
[Music]
it's thursday the 31st of december good
morning our top story
more than three quarters of people in
england are waking up to the toughest
coronavirus restrictions this morning
the midlands northeast parts of
northwest and parts of the southwest
among those
escalated to tier four the prime
minister boris johnson has described it
as a critical moment and urge people to
stay at home for new year's eve
celebrations
tonight john mcmanus has this report
hidden behind scaffolding and silence
since 2017. tonight big ben
will temporarily return to normal
service
as it rings in 2021
[Music]
but there's no such reprieve for much of
england where the new year will start on
a somber note
with millions more people moving into
the highest coronavirus tier
from today it means they must now try to
stay at home
with household mixing band and
non-essential shops and services closed
it's a tough ask especially at this time
of year
i must ask you to follow the rules
uh where you live tomorrow night and see
in the new
year safely at home that means not
meeting up with friends or family
indoors unless they're in the same
household or support bubble
and avoiding large gatherings of any
kind
the latest figures for the whole of the
uk show more than 50 000 new infections
recorded in the latest 24 hours
with 981 new deaths reported on
wednesday
you can see unfortunately it is
a pretty grim
and depressing picture at the moment
the situation in the uk is precarious
in many parts already particularly the
south
east and london areas that are now under
the tightest restrictions
include leicester the north east and
greater manchester
in total just under 80 percent of the
population
in england shropshire devon and cornwall
are amongst those moving up into tier
three with no region now in tier two
only two thousand residents on the owls
of scilly remain in tier one
millions of people in northern ireland
wales and scotland are already living
under the toughest restrictions
for those facing tier four for the first
time there's some unhappiness
i'm in shock it's completely ridiculous
how they keep blocking us in and locking
us out and he's coming back and forth
if we need to be more organized in what
they do and just kind of figure out
what's really going on
it's not ideal for us but i think that's
important
and people need to follow and just be
there because i think they're more
important things like
the hospitals and patients who are
suffering while i have had the
university experience for one and
i just i turned 18 so i can't really do
normal things that an 18 year old does
but i mean it's fine
rising case numbers and a feared further
rise after christmas
are driving the new restrictions but it
will be some time before we know which
direction the virus will take
in 2021 john mcmanus bbc news
one of the areas which has now moved to
tier four is burnley
looks megopal's there for us this
morning morning to you looks me what's
been the reaction there
morning nina that's right burnley is
among the places that
are among three quarters of england's
population waking up
under tier four restrictions this
morning burnley and the whole county
of lancashire have been moved to the
highest level of coronavirus
restrictions
tier iv and that reflects the surge in
coronavirus cases across the nation
for example here in burnley it's got the
highest infection rate in the whole of
lancashire
it's around 466 cases per hundred
thousand people
and under tier four from today
non-essential businesses non-essential
shops must close
as well as hairdressers barbers nail
salons
beauty salons and in addition places
that serve food or drink can only open
for takeaway or delivery you can imagine
the impact that we'll have on an area
that's already been
battered by restrictions for a while now
and in addition of course in tier four
there's a stay-at-home order which means
that
people must stay at home and stay in
their tier four area
apart from for certain exceptions
including work education and child care
reasons
now the government hasn't said how long
these restrictions will be in place for
but they'll be reviewed in about two
weeks time
looks me in burnley many thanks
only vulnerable pupils and key worker
children will return to secondary school
classrooms as planned on monday
after the government's decision to delay
their reopening
the temporary closure is to slow the
spread of the virus and allow
schools time to establish a mass testing
programme but teaching unions have
criticized the plans with one labeling
it
a last-minute mess well our reporter
guitense is outside a secondary school
in nottingham
for us this morning uh keith of course
all schools had been
desperately hoping for information about
how and when they might be able to
reopen
tell us a little more
yes good morning um most pupils
at colleges and secondary schools like
this one here in nottingham
will see a delay to classroom teaching
for most that delay will be
for two weeks so let's take a look at
the changes so from now
at the 11th of january a week on monday
that's when
year 11 and year 13 students will be
allowed back for face-to-face teaching
so they're the pupils that will be
sitting their exams next year
after that a week later on the 18th of
january that's when all
other year groups will be allowed to
return to the classroom
so everyone will be back hopefully at
secondary schools across
england now all these schools are being
asked to provide
remote learning from next week for all
pupils and they're also being asked to
provide
face-to-face teaching for vulnerable
children and also
the children of key workers the picture
is a little bit different for primary
schools so
most primary schools will reopen from
monday as
planned except for areas where there are
high transmission rates at the moment
that's
in the south of england and those areas
have been published by the government
now when this was announced
yesterday as you mentioned schools
parents
as well as students themselves really
anticipating what the government would
say and they say that this is key
to breaking the transmission rate and
also will give schools
more time to implement mass testing
programmes
but it has been criticized by teaching
unions who say
the announcement doesn't go far enough
and that one union said it was a last
minute mess so many bracing themselves
for another
slightly turbulent start to a new term
giza thank you very much probably worth
saying as well we're speaking to gavin
williamson the education secretary
that's
7 30 this morning it's eight minutes
past six now boris johnson's trade deal
with the european union has become law
the bill cleared parliament after being
approved by mps and peers overnight it
was given royal assent by the queen the
deal
takes effect at 11 pm when the uk will
stop following
eu rules here's our political
correspondent
chris mason this was the moment
late into the night when the brexit
trade deal became
the law of the land her majesty has
signified her royal assent to the
following night
european union future relationship act
2020.
the final confirmation that it's 11
o'clock tonight
after four and a half years of argument
since the referendum
the uk will begin a new relationship
with the european union if you're
thinking
hasn't all this happened already didn't
we leave
in january well yes legally brexit did
happen
11 months ago but in practical terms
it happens tonight as the uk leaves the
eu
single market and the customs union
after all the noise the turbulence the
flag waving the megaphones the
resignations the elections of the last
few years
the debate here in the last few days
with the overwhelming
support for the government's deal has
felt something like a
fire blanket smothering many
of the past flames of anger
plenty of courts are still hugely
passionate about
brexit one way or another the smp
opposed the deal among others and this
won't be the last time you
ever hear the b word but things
may just may be a little
quieter from now on chris mason bbc news
at westminster the queen's new year's
honors have been announced
and in a year like no other many of the
recipients are members of the public
being recognized
for their brave and selfless work during
the pandemic there are of course the
usual accolades for stars from the world
of sport
stage and screen including a knighthood
for the formula one world champion
lewis hamilton our entertainment
correspondent lisa mazimba
has more the man from stevenage becomes
the most successful formula one driver
of all time
he's already won a record-equaling
seventh world championship
and the title of sports personality of
the year
lewis hamilton where he gave fans a
message
of positivity please everyone out there
go out and
follow your dreams to all the kids
please never give up on yourself
and now lewis hamilton has finished his
incredible year
with a knighthood sheila hancock
says she feels a real sense of
responsibility
after being made a dane for her drama
and charity work
i hope i'll grow into it and i will
pay back the honor that's been paid me
that's that's what i want to do also
becoming a dame
pat mcgrath arguably the most
influential makeup artist in fashion
award-winning actress leslie manville
has been made a cbe
and singer craig david an mbe
following a long campaign for every
surviving member of england's 1966 world
cup squad to receive an honor
ron flowers and jimmy grieves have both
been made mbes
and at more than a hundred years old and
baker's been honored for her fundraising
for the nspcc
i think it's so important really to
think of the children because
they're the future they're our future
after all
so i really was thrilled
to find this honor making this a
particular year of celebration for anne
who at 106 is the oldest person
ever to be recognized with an honor lisa
masimba bbc news
and the former rugby league star rob
burrow has been awarded an mba
as part of the new year honours in
recognition of his campaigning
for motor neuron disease the 38 year old
was diagnosed with
mnd in december 2019 he's been sharing
his story
throughout this year with bbc breakfast
and says it's truly humbling to receive
the
honor it is coming up to 13
minutes past six we'll join matt now to
check in with the weather
it was beyond nippy in salford this
morning matt
i think that's the best way to describe
it nina yes certainly beyond
this morning big jacket big gloves big
everything now
northern england coldest in fact this
morning minus six in parts of north
yorkshire right now
icy conditions across many areas of the
uk so take it easy this morning not
helped by the fact we've got more wintry
showers
snow flurries the moment in northern
ireland today on these western fringes
of england and where there's a rumble of
thunder with those
and more significant snow pushing in
towards the north of scotland
particularly over the grampians that
will turn back to rain those who go
through the day
lots of dry and bright weather for much
of england and wales today with some
sunshine but some
lingering fog patches across parts of
east midlands and east anglia
and as we go into the afternoon some of
those will remain uh the rain
snow turns to rain across the northeast
of scotland slightly less cold air
pushing in still though
fair few centimeters across the tops of
the grampians will be covering over the
southern uplands too uh showers turning
back to rain in northern ireland
probably a wetter end to the day here
but still some wintry flurries in wales
in the southwest
and it's going to be another cold day
particularly further south and east
especially where those lingering fog
patches are
as we see the year out though go into
the brand new year continue with some
showers wintry nature northern scotland
some wintry showers two to the far north
of england as well
rain showers further west could be an
icy start to
2021 once again with temperatures widely
below freezing but the start
of the new year as you go through the
days ahead it stays cold if anything a
little bit windier
best of the sunshine will be in the west
i'll have more throughout the morning
back to you both
matt thanks for watching chat to you
later on time now is 14 minutes past
6. let's take a look at the front pages
of today's papers um it is
always darkest before the dawn that's
the headline in the daily mirror it
reports the news that the uk recorded
its highest death toll since april
yesterday but also of course
news of the second vaccine approval
david telegraph says the oxford asterisk
zenica vaccine could
stave off for lockdown initially the
article quotes the prime minister saying
that not only is there light at the end
of the tunnel but the tunnel itself has
been
shortened and we're moving faster
through it
one giant hope for mankind says the sun
about the oxford jab which is shown in
the photo
they're blasting off just like a rocket
and the most read story on bbc news
website this morning
is the plea from england's national
medical director for people to stay at
home for new year's eve celebrations
which of course are
tonight
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news